three service members killed at least 40
injured in a drone attack President
Biden who has been briefed on all the
options available said he has now
decided what his response will be he
didn't elaborate but his National
Security spokesman John Kirby suggested
it would be a teered response guiding
principle is making sure um that we
continue
to degrade the kinds of capabilities
that these groups have at their disposal
to use against our troops and our
facilities and to send send a strong
signal uh uh to their backers in the
irgc that these attacks are unacceptable
and we're going to do the president will
do what he has to do to protect our
troops and our facilities and to look
after our national security uh our
national security interest in the
region Brad Bowman is a senior director
of the center on Military and political
power at the foundation for defense of
democracies Brad thank you very much for
being with us um what do you take from
what you've heard this afternoon what
what do you think President Biden and
his security team are
thinking I thanks for the opportunity to
join you I think the Biden
administration's clear goal here is to
restore deterrence which was clearly
tattered I mean we've seen more than 167
attacks on US forces in Iraq and Syria
and now Jordan with these three service
members paying for it with their lives
and this Administration has to act
there's bipartisan consensus on that I
believe it has to act strongly it's
premise throughout uh the last few weeks
at least since October 7th if not long
before that is that American restraint
uh was the best way to do this uh many
Republicans on Capitol Hill worry that
that restraint is what got us to this
point and that restraint has been read
by the Islamic Republic of Iran and its
Terror proxies as weakness and a green
light for additional aggression that's
really interesting because I was asking
this question last night whether
American first policy talk of withdrawal
the language from the administration
that there needs to be restraint whether
all of that in is in fact seen as
weakness in Russia Iran China um we've
seen a tweet today from from Wesley
Clark the former supreme commander of
NATO who said stop talking about about
retaliation and restraint just go after
the people who are sending the bombs and
that's
Iran yeah you know we sometimes forget
you know I worked for in the US Senate
for nine years we sometimes forget that
leaders can't talk to One audience at a
time right and so when when you're
speaking in Brussels or Washington or
Davos you're talking about restraint and
reason and proportionality it all sounds
very good and it earns you cool points
but I I do worry many in Washington
worry that our adversaries hear very
differently and if you're on a
playground you say hey I don't want to
fight I don't want to fight what do you
expect the bully to do keep throwing
punches and unfortunately that's what
we've seen both in the Red Sea with the
houthis and also in Iraq and Syria with
the Iranian proxies and militias there
so when you talk about a strong response
are you saying that it needs to go
beyond a strike on the proxies does it
have to in some way stretch the
boundaries of what we might ordinarily
consider
proportional my view is that what the
Islamic Republic of Iran is doing is a
decades long strategy where they're the
puppet master and they use Terror uh
puppets proxies around the region I'm
thinking of Hezbollah Hamas Palestinian
Islamic Jihad and now the houthis to
advance Iran's foreign policy objectives
while displacing the consequences and
the counterpunches onto others usually
Arabs it's it's going quite swimmingly
for because everyone's focusing on the
proxies right now meanwhile Iran is
inching toward a nuclear weapons
capability and and has has put a least
on hold for now normalization between
Saudi Arabia and Israel so um the bottom
line is we can't have our adversaries
from an American perspective thinking
that they can kill American Service
members and get away with it so we're
going to see a strong response I predict
much of it will come in Syria maybe in
Iraq there's some reasons why the
administration might want to avoid that
um and I think if we only go after the
proxies and not go after some of the
Islamic revolutionary guard Corp uh
elements particularly in Syria and
elsewhere then it plays right into
Iran's Puppet Master puppet strategy
that I just described all that said
you'll have heard our discussion on the
deal that's being discussed was
discussed in Paris at the weekend and
also the warnings from the Qatari prime
minister who was in Washington yesterday
that a response that goes too far could
complicate the whole
process that's fine it's interesting
though people always express concern
about escalation when America is talking
about responding but let me
reiterate 167 attacks since October 17th
on US forces so how would anyone expect
the United States to respond and uh you
know I think In This Moment the danger
really is too weak of a response but
I'll hasten to add if the administration
hits back hard and doesn't take steps to
protect American forces we're going to
Simply see a more American casualties we
saw that after the solomani killing in
January 2020 where we had more than 100
americ an in two bases in Northern Iraq
suffered from traumatic brain injury
because there wasn't sufficient air and
missile defense in the region so hit
them hard yes restore deterrence if
possible but expect an escalation at
least in the short term and make sure
you've taken steps in advance to protect
American forces that's what I would be
offering to the administration in this
moment well the president has put them
on notice uh we will keep watching
through the night um because it sounds
like it could be imminent Brad Bowman
thank you very much indeed for that
thank you thank you